# Code Book
###this file discribes the data set, the variables of it, and how we modify it in order to obtain tidy data set.
#Preface
the data used for this project was generated by an investigation of the Università degli Studi di Genova.
From the [webpage](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones) we extract the following d0escription:

"He experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data."

This translates to dataset with 10299 observations and 563 variables. There are 2 factor variables ("activity" and "subject") and the following 563
are tecnical calculations that are not relevant right now. If you want more information on this matter please visit the research [webpage](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)
#the modifications
However the researchers decided to devide the dataset on a train and test set. Also for this two splits they separated de factor variables from the technical variables. This creates 6 datasets 
there fore in order to have a tidy data set we have to put it back together. Especifically the assignment require us to do the following:

*1-Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
*2- Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.
*3- Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
*4- Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
*5- From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

Since we only need the measurements for the mean and standard deviation (point 2). we have 68 variables left including the two categorical variables.
(see at the end of this document the list of all the variables). 

#Way of merging the data
first we bind by columns the 3 train's files ("X_train.txt", "Y_train.txt", "subject_train.txt"). Then we bind by columns the test's files ("X_test.txt", "Y_test.txt", "subject_test.txt").
finally we bind the previous 2 results by rows to obtain a data set of 10299 by 68 (point1). We decided to first bind by column first because that way the order of the observation is preserved, a common error is to rowbind without knowing that the data changes order and therefore when you columnbind the oberservations will be messup.
as a reasuring measure we test to see if the resulting dataset had any NA values, but there were none. 
#labeling
we labeled 2 things the names of the variables (point 4) and the names for the activities (point 3). For the variable names we use the file that we use to select only the variables that we wanted (point 1) and then extract the parentesis and other special character in order to have variable names that don't seem so technical
for the activities names we used the file "activity_labels.txt" provided by researchers and stored it as a factor. We also converted the "subject" variable as a factor in order to have the variable ready for analysis. 

#Generating the tidy dataset
with the dataset properly labeled and transformed we are ready to make the calculations required on point 5. In order to do that we 
use the r libraries "reshape2" with the function "melt" in order make it easier to take the mean of each interaction between the two factor variables and all the other variables.
we make this calculations happen using the another function of the library "reshape2" called "dcast". With these codes we obtain a dataset of dimensions 180 by 68.
the variables but as the means. Before each row was an observation of a subject doing an activity and we could have several observation of the same subject and activity. On the final data set, we grouped we only have one line per subject per activity (example we grouped all the observations of walking for subject 1 and calculted the means for all the variables)
as an extra I also sorted the final database by subject and activity because I find it easier to browse.  

#List of variables
1 "subject"
2 "activity"
3 "tBodyAcc mean X"
4 "tBodyAcc mean Y"
5 "tBodyAcc mean Z"
6 "tBodyAcc std X"
7 "tBodyAcc std Y"
8 "tBodyAcc std Z"
9 "tGravityAcc mean X"
10 "tGravityAcc mean Y"
11 "tGravityAcc mean Z"
12 "tGravityAcc std X"
13 "tGravityAcc std Y"
14 "tGravityAcc std Z"
15 "tBodyAccJerk mean X"
16 "tBodyAccJerk mean Y"
17 "tBodyAccJerk mean Z"
18 "tBodyAccJerk std X"
19 "tBodyAccJerk std Y"
20 "tBodyAccJerk std Z"
21 "tBodyGyro mean X"
22 "tBodyGyro mean Y"
23 "tBodyGyro mean Z"
24 "tBodyGyro std X"
25 "tBodyGyro std Y"
26 "tBodyGyro std Z"
27 "tBodyGyroJerk mean X"
28 "tBodyGyroJerk mean Y"
29 "tBodyGyroJerk mean Z"
30 "tBodyGyroJerk std X"
31 "tBodyGyroJerk std Y"
32 "tBodyGyroJerk std Z"
33 "tBodyAccMag mean"
34 "tBodyAccMag std"
35 "tGravityAccMag mean"
36 "tGravityAccMag std"
37 "tBodyAccJerkMag mean"
38 "tBodyAccJerkMag std"
39 "tBodyGyroMag mean"
40 "tBodyGyroMag std"
41 "tBodyGyroJerkMag mean"
42 "tBodyGyroJerkMag std"
43 "fBodyAcc mean X"
44 "fBodyAcc mean Y"
45 "fBodyAcc mean Z"
46 "fBodyAcc std X"
47 "fBodyAcc std Y"
48 "fBodyAcc std Z"
49 "fBodyAccJerk mean X"
50 "fBodyAccJerk mean Y"
51 "fBodyAccJerk mean Z"
52 "fBodyAccJerk std X"
53 "fBodyAccJerk std Y"
54 "fBodyAccJerk std Z"
55 "fBodyGyro mean X"
56 "fBodyGyro mean Y"
57 "fBodyGyro mean Z"
58 "fBodyGyro std X"
59 "fBodyGyro std Y"
60 "fBodyGyro std Z"
61 "fBodyAccMag mean"
62 "fBodyAccMag std"
63 "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag mean"
64 "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag std"
65 "fBodyBodyGyroMag mean"
66 "fBodyBodyGyroMag std"
67 "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag mean"
68 "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag std"


